a lot of important people.
I was a little apprehensive about serving in
things like Norwegian sardines, and they were
very popular, and those mussels on a half shell,
and they're very popular again. They just seemed
to, I guess that they were so seldom anywhere until
it was just a novelty of some kind. But they'd take
them and eat them. And I was always amazed at that.
We started at our buffets, by the way. We would have
a lot of fruits and desserts types that they could
pick up and take on over to the game if they wanted
to. And of course sometimes they would, not very
much. But I really I remember the time that we
started dipping the fruits in the hot chocolate,
which was old hat to a lot of people, but there
seemed to be a certain group, too, that really
thought that was something special and
appreciated the strawberries and some of the
dried fruits like apricots were very good dipped
in chocolate. Well, it was always, if you could
think of something extra to do, like Dick Cutchish
and his method of serving, and you recall him. He
had a method of putting a plate together. He always
used romaine leaves underneath the entrees, and
he could make any plate attractive to him. And I
always told him, I said, Dick, you can touch a plate
and make it look better. And that was almost true,
almost true. And then he'd work hours late at night
at serving the biggest elaborate, elaborate
banquet you could think of. Go home and eat a peanut
butter and jelly sandwich. Now, in the facilities
here, how long could y'all keep fresh lettuce, for
example, before it was served? How many days? Oh,
well, of course, you get it in the head and you cut
it, and you'd probably, if you didn't serve it one
day, sometimes it'd be good the next. Probably you
wouldn't keep it beyond the second day. All right,
if you haven't broken up the head, how long can it
be? Oh, well, that's about a week. A week? Nothing
like that. All right, then fresh beef or pork or
chicken that hasn't been frozen, how long can it be
kept in the cold storage? Well, uh, and chill
stove. Well, that's served, that's a week or two
easily. So then there was, there were fresh
vegetables, fruits, and meat arriving daily or
weekly? No, no, no. We didn't use much fresh beef.
We used, uh, we used a lot of the, sometimes the
steaks would be. But most of it came in frozen.
Okay. Most all the meats. And it would once per week
or per month or what? Well, that depended on how
fast we were using it, but we'd try to get enough to
last maybe a month when we bought something,
unless it was a very special item. There were very,
very few times we would have something that was
just for that one occasion, but it was sometimes
that way. It would be one time, but mostly it was...
something we could hold because you got good
enough storage you can keep most anything that's
not a fresh product now a carload of beef normally
would come from where geographically kansas city
omaha colorado okay midwest one of those places
the plains okay uh did you ever have any difficulty
i'm going to use the word politically that we were
not buying enough from a certain part of the
country and we were buying too much from some other
part? Did anybody ever complain? No, but we had a
very closely associated problem. We used to buy
canned beef that was packed in South America. Ah,
okay. Under our people's jurisdiction, Swift and
Company and Armour, and the Beef Growers
Association found out about that. Went to the
state and had the law changed so that we couldn't do
that anymore. That was one of the finest beef
you've ever seen. No fat, tender, firmly packed,
and we had to quit using it. Was that law in effect
when you retired? Yes, yes. As a matter of fact, it
had been a number of years before I retired that law
went into effect. Any restrictions on canned
goods and their origins, national origin? Not
national origin. We never would have considered
buying anything canned other than packed within
the United States. That all has to be under USDA.
Now what are some points that I haven't written
down that I haven't thought of that you must have?
Well, one of the interesting points is that the
opinion of people always thought that we got all
our food from the campus, A&M Farms. And the only
product we got from A&M consistently was milk. And
the funny thing happened there, my old friend O.D.
Butler was in charge of the dairy, among other
things. When I came here, I found that I could take
bids out of Dallas and have it delivered to me
cheaper into the dining hall, then he would set it
on the back dock. So I started taking bids for milk.
Well, the first thing he heard about it, he had a
call from Oak Farms in Dallas that wanted to know
how much he wanted to sell the dairy for. Asked him
why. He said, well, you must be selling it because
they didn't buy their milk elsewhere. So I used to
tell the joke that O.D. walked over on his knees to
talk about it. I didn't know he was using those
funds to support his dairy. I thought it was an easy
sale anywhere that he was just selling us a sort of
flavor. Well, he said, no, he said, it's really
important. He said, don't want to lose that
business. I said, well, you know, you're hiring
everybody. So he explained then the southern milk
shed and the northern milk shed. I said, well, that
doesn't matter a hoot to me. I said, I bought milk. I
was in the military and we furnished milk from
where we got it the cheapest. We have to do that. We
got a dollar and a half a day per person for three
meals a day. So he said, well, you know, I've always
been for food service. I want to do whatever I can
for you. And I said, well, see what you can do. So he
lowered, he figured the price down for us. And we
were always good friends, but it couldn't have
gone the other way because I was totally innocent
about the fact that he was depending on that.
Another thing is, I guess you know this story, it
was in a, or may not, a lot of people don't know, it
was in this book on the moms, it was a book, Moms,
Aggies, Moms, and Apple Pies, about the $40,000
pie. Well, that's the way we got Duncan Hall, my
friend E.H. Schmidt. I learned this story and got
him together with the author of this book and got it
printed. And he was the head baker here, and
Roosevelt came here in the late 1930s. And so he
baked him an orange chiffon pie, probably the
original orange chiffon out of natural
ingredients, nothing... This orange juice and
all the things that go with orange chiffon pie. And
President Roosevelt liked this pie real well. So
our physical plant went over and built a
refrigerator on his rail car. Mr. Schmidt had 50
pies cooked for him to take back to Washington with
him. Well, when it came time to build the Duncan
area, they didn't have the money. So Elliot
Roosevelt was on the board of directors. So he gets
in touch with his dad to get a loan. Well, the story
is, the great influence were those pies. And that
each pie was worth $40,000. It came out, 50 pies,
$40,000 to build the entire Duncan area. And to
further about that story, and this may be
partially hearsay, was that really it was,
Elliot's mother who got interested in the lawn and
really was the power behind it. You mean Elliot?
You mean Eleanor Roosevelt? Yeah, Eleanor. And
the money then was loaned, I think, by Jesse Jones.
And one of the reasons that I found it a little bit
amusing, we were still paying on Duncan when I came
back here. in 1965, and I don't know when it was paid
off, but we were still paying on Duncan. Because it
is a bond. All right, Duncan is a new facility when
you arrive as a student? Yes, it finished in 39. I
got here in 40. And Hotard said the first year he
operated that he was afraid to go out among the
students because all the equipment he had was just
to boil You had to boil the meat, boil the
vegetables, boil everything. He said he couldn't
fry or couldn't bake anything. So he said, I didn't
even go out among where anybody could see me. But
that became the $40,000 pie, and that story's in
that book. All right, who are some other
celebrities that you remember serving in the 20
years plus? Oh, Governor Connolly was here, lots
of the governors, and they just came here
routinely. And before my time, one of the people at
the Sabisa that was there said Clarence Darrow had
eaten in the Sabisa.
And the Prince of Saudi Arabia was dying there. But
the governors was about as high as we ever had, to my
knowledge. Now, after they
built the new facilities, they began to have some
dignitaries, a couple of presidents and those
people there, but not in the dining halls. They
never came down to that place. They'd be serving.
You were looking at your notes for some other
items. Oh, well, let's see. We covered nearly
everything. We got $1.50 a day. That was what
you... Oh, at early on? Yes, and it was hard to break
out of that. That was the cost of the food and
beverage? For the day. For the day? For each
person. When you left, when you retired, reckon
what that figure was? Oh, it was not, not, it was
about double that, about double that. And we had a,
we had a big menu. That was for one entree, of
course, and two vegetables, and dessert and
beverage. And Sebesa alone had 28 entrees, which
might have been too elaborate, I don't know, but
now they keep adding to it. In your years, did the
cost of supplying food for students, were the
costs higher in Duncan or Sebesa, or were they
about the same? Maybe a little higher in Duncan,
particularly at times. The food cost in the
university always runs high. For male students,
it always runs a little higher than that. And for
places restricted. Of course, the missed meal
factor is the only way we survive. That's the only
way we survive. And that was true when I was a
student. Of course, when I was a student,
everybody ate every meal except on the weekend.
Everybody tried to leave on the weekend. Well, it
had changed. When I got here, they missed a lot of
meals, but they had a little more money. They could
eat outside, and they skipped other meals. I
finally got it reduced to 20 meals a week because it
was just too intense in some ways. And so, it's been
that way since. Uh, it's, it's, it's interesting.
I, I don't know whether I'd do it if I had to do it or
not. I told somebody once, I thought I'd decorate
flowers, uh, and decorate with flowers instead,
because you could work for hundreds of hours at
Escalona Buffet, and the most elaborate thing
you've ever seen was special setups. And about 30
minutes before the, the, the, the, oh, you open the
doors, here comes the florist dancing in and puts a
few flowers together. The first person that walks
through there says, what beautiful flowers.
When you all had worked days off. Except for
Governor Clements. He saw the food. Did he? That's
true. Most of them did, really. Let's see.
Did we finish a while ago on advice to the A&M
leadership today that you might have? Well, maybe
we didn't. I would hope that they would give good
support to the Department of Field Services and
give them liberty to operate so that they could
operate in a manner in which they knew would
respond to the desires of their customer, which is
a student, which is always a little removed from
administration, further removed than it is from
the people within the operations. And that's
about the only thing I would want them to do. But the
main thing is to guard against the going outside to
seek the commercialization of their operation
when they can get good people within their own
establishment. Let's see.
whether it involved you directly or not, what's
your favorite Aggie funny story, amusing story? I
don't know that I have one. I never gave that any
thought. I guess it's the fact that... What you
call an Aggie five years after graduation
is lost. If I had been down, I never gave that much
thought. All right. Then I guess just about the
last one would be let's make believe that someone
comes in and gives you a big
cash gift and says, I want you to, I'm talking about
big money, And I want you to give it to whatever it is
at A&M that you care most about, that you would most
want to help. What would that, where, to whom
would, or to what area or areas would you give it?
For what purpose? Well, if it's enough money, I'd
say to start a school on food management.
Because I tried to get that done for many years. I
wrote the first letter on it in 1966. Right. And
President Rudder, with appropriate
clarification, Howard and others, and asking
that we get something going. And nothing
happened, so Dr. Potts found out about it and said,
let me take over that. And he tried as hard as
anybody could to do that. But every time we'd get in
gear for it, they'd say, well, this is not the time
for that. And this went on for years. In the
meantime, all these other schools went ahead and
did it. And what happens, the fact that we don't
have that means that we have all this technical
training, and we have down here all this ag science
training. But right here in the middle is a hole.
And that hole is made up of food management. It
could easily be incorporated within things we
already have, like merchandising and It's a
fairly large national industry. It is the largest
employer, one of the three or four largest
employers consistently within each state and
within the nation. And I've had people come to me
and say, well, you know, we've already trained
dieticians. I say, yes, but the top food
management hires dieticians. And that's good,
but dietetics is part of it. So we have never had
that, and probably never will. For some reason,
the people within an institution like this that
are scientifically inclined particularly feel
that it's just a little beneath the dignity.
There's not enough science in it. I said, well,
I've told most of those people that I've heard, I
said, well, there's both science and art. It
combines everything. And I'd always hoped, but I
would still try that. I was offered, Mr. Sabiza's
grandson once came up, and we were in a down period,
and he heard about our efforts. He didn't have a lot
of money, but he had He had $25,000. He said, I've
got $25,000 I want to give you for this school. At
the time, I said, there's no use. It's on the bottom
of the barrel. And we'll have to wait for better
times. That was a Mr. Kerr. And he had told me a lot
about his dad. And granddad, he was. He died in
Cuba. I didn't know that. Well, she's buried out
there. Yeah. But they died in Cuba. Was he on
vacation? No, no, his son. Oh, I see, I see. Because
he was Austrian, wasn't he? Yes, yes, he was
Austrian. They had to give him some gold to come
over here. That's right. He had storms, and a
firefighter ran him out of Galveston. He was a very
ingenious individual. That's what I heard.
Ingenious person. And so was Hotar. And Duffy
might have been. I didn't know. I didn't know much
about country, but I know that Seville and Oak
Grove are outstanding in many respects. Well, you
carried on in a splendid fashion in your
tradition. I got by. And I'm grateful to you for all
that you've meant to this university, and I thank
you for your time today. If I've been anything, I'm
grateful. Oh, thank you.